The public police force was created in 1838 in order to protect the wares of merchants. By the late 1880s, police officers were all over the country. “Today, police forces are a major part of local government operations and the second-largest budget item after education.” According to USA facts statistics “police accounts for 9.2% of all local governments spending. This works out to 192,940 per police officer, including part-time employees”.  They are founded on the 1829 principles of modern policing, one of them being “To recognize always that the power of the police to fulfill their functions and duties is dependent on public approval of their existence, actions, and behavior and on their ability to secure and maintain public respect.” (Sir Robert Peel, 1829). This means that to effectively keep the public safe they must earn their trust, protect all members of the community, and only use force as a last resort. 
​
However, according to a research article from the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences “Policing plays a key role in maintaining structural inequalities between people of color and white people in the United States”. Using the same fatal encounter data set as us, they studied how individual’s age, race, ethnicity, and sex influence their risk of being killed by the police force. Their results highlighted that the risk of being killed by police is greater for people of color - especially young men. This can be observed in the table below which presents the ratio of the risk for different ethnicities relative to the risk for Caucasians. They have qualified the risk of a black man dying at the hands of police brutality to be 2.5 times higher than those of a white man.
Ratio of police use-of-force deaths to all deaths by age, sex, and race. starkly unequal across racial groups. Police use of force is responsible for 1.6% of all deaths involving black men between the ages of 20 y and 24 y
ratio figure.jpg
The large racial/ethnic inequities in the rates at which White and Black people die due to police force is not only morally wrong and a manifestation of structural racism in The United States, but it is also considered to pose a national public health issue. In addition to decreasing the lifespan of the victims, a recent study found that “police killings of unarmed black Americans were associated with worse mental health among other black Americans in the general US population”. The historical context of the country and the remaining inequalities are suggested to mediate these mental health struggles. Additionally, other embodiments of structural racism such as, the targeting of black Americans and the lack of repercussions on the police officers who kill black Americans (Kindy & Kelly, 2015), dehumanizes them.  All of these factors and the current momentum of awareness in the United States is what prompted us to investigate the country. In addition to this, the difference in funding levels from state to state will enable us to compare various methods of tackling crime, which is directly linked to police brutality.
 
This issue of undervaluing Black Lives is what prompted the creation of the Black Lives Matter movement in 2013. Their mission is to “eradicate white supremacy and build local power to intervene in violence inflicted on Black communities by the state and vigilantes”. They are working for a world where the same amount of accountability should exist when a murder happens, whether the victim is black or of any other ethnicity. #Defund the police is one of the fringe movements they support. This movement stemmed from the early 1900s, ( Walter Benjamin’s 1921 Critique of Violence  theory.) The work of academics such as Alex Vitale and Ruth Wilson Gilmore helped push the idea of social reconstruction rather than police and incarceration even further into our contemporary society. 
 
In this interview with Kevin Robinson, a lecturer in Arizona State University's School of Criminology and Criminal Justice and a retired police officer, he shares his vision of a viable way to defund the police. He believes that re-allocating “portions of police department budgets” is what the movement should aim for and even expresses that “Realistically speaking, the tightening of a police department’s budget is not a bad idea.” He goes on to explain that police budgets are tight as it includes many fixed costs. Such as personnel cost, equipment, vehicle maintenance, and training. This being said, he - like the movement - believes that “Effective social programs can reduce criminality in adults and juveniles”. He gives the example of education programs, stating “it’s about giving a vulnerable population positive options.” 
 
This being said, the professor warns that if a “defunding” occur , “services will cease to be the responsibility of law enforcement”. He explains that diminishing the risk of being caught and of punishment with adverse effects could potentially increase the rate of crime. This is an aspect and perspective to consider when studying this controversial topic. 
 
On the other hand, increasing funds in the education sector has proven to substantially reduce spendings on crime. Research has shown that in 2003, over 50% of prison inmates were high school dropouts (Bonczar, 2003). Gaining an education will impact criminal predispositions and limit the need to commit crimes. The table below “shows the annual criminal activity for the cohort of 20-year-olds who are dropouts. It shows high numbers of arrests and crimes for five crime types. The final column shows the impact of high school graduation (adjusted for college progression) on the commission of these crimes."

The increasing momentum of movements such as Black Lives Matter and #defund the police has led to the re-evaluation of today’s police by academics and governments too. For example in Minneapolis, council member Jeremiah Ellison tweeted: “We are going to dismantle the Minneapolis Police Department. And when we’re done, we’re not simply gonna glue it back together. We are going to dramatically rethink how we approach public safety and emergency response.” The many protests and large awareness seem to represent a changing tide in terms of racial equality in the country. However, Minneapolis ultimately decided to only reduce their police budget by 4.5 percent, this will have little to no effect.  Peter Enns, professor of government at Cornell, argues that “The solution is better jobs, better education, better drug treatment programs, there needs to be a lot more spending and investment in social programs, public services and opportunities, and a lot less investment in the act of policing.”
 
A lot of literature and research about what the movement actually means and its relevance currently exists. Yet little attention has been paid thus far to evaluate how valuable it might be to partially defund the police and reallocate these resources in an optimal way towards improving social conditions. This could be explained by the lack of states who have fully committed to thoroughly rethinking their police budget and systems. This is why we have decided to study police brutality levels in relation to the funding of both the police and social sectors (Welfare, education) by comparing states. We hope that any trends and differences between states will guide us in gaining insight into how beneficial defunding the police would be in terms of reducing police brutality incidents. 
